backend/README.md, before:

# Pet Shelter Backend

Run locally:

1. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and adjust as needed, or use the provided `.env` for local dev.
2. Install dependencies:

```bash
npm install
```

1. Generate Prisma client and run migrations (creates `dev.db`):

```bash
npx prisma generate
npx prisma migrate dev --name init
```

1. Seed the database:

```bash
npm run seed
```

## Default admin credentials

- Email: `admin@example.com`
- Password: `Admin123!@#`

Re-running the seed script now upgrades existing admin accounts that were created with older bcrypt hashes so they authenticate without server errors. To force-reset the admin password (for example, after changing the default), set `SEED_ADMIN_FORCE_RESET=true` when running `npm run seed`.

1. Run in dev mode:

```bash
npm run dev
```

Run tests (Jest + SuperTest):

```bash
NODE_ENV=test npm test
```

## OAuth provider setup (dev)

1. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and fill in:

- `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID` / `GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET`
- `GOOGLE_REDIRECT_URI` (default: `http://localhost:4000/auth/oauth/google/callback`)
- `GITHUB_CLIENT_ID` / `GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET`
- `GITHUB_REDIRECT_URI` (default: `http://localhost:4000/auth/oauth/github/callback`)
- `OAUTH_SUCCESS_REDIRECT` (default: `http://localhost:5173/`)
- `OAUTH_FAILURE_REDIRECT` (default: `http://localhost:5173/login?error=oauth_failed`)

1. Configure allowed callback URLs in the providers’ dashboards to match the redirect URIs above.

1. Ensure the frontend dev server runs on `http://localhost:5173` (Vite default) and the backend on `:4000`.

1. Enable providers via Admin Settings (`auth.google = true`, `auth.github = true`).

Then visit `/auth/oauth/google/start` or `/auth/oauth/github/start` from the browser.

## Email delivery (verification & reset)

For development, the server will log emails to the console if SMTP is not configured. To enable real email sending, set these variables in `.env`:

```env
SMTP_HOST=smtp.example.com
SMTP_PORT=587
SMTP_SECURE=false
SMTP_USER=apikey-or-username
SMTP_PASS=secret
EMAIL_FROM="Pet Shelter <no-reply@example.com>"
APP_ORIGIN=http://localhost:5173
```

APP_ORIGIN is used to build verification and reset links like `http://localhost:5173/verify-email?token=...` and `http://localhost:5173/reset-password?token=...`.

CI notes

- The repository contains a GitHub Actions workflow at `.github/workflows/ci.yml` that installs dependencies, runs Prisma generate, applies migrations against a local sqlite file, runs the seed script, and runs tests.
- For production Postgres, set `DATABASE_URL` to your Postgres DSN and update `prisma/schema.prisma` provider accordingly before running migrations.

## Security quick start

This backend supports account lockout, per-IP rate limits, email verification, and password history enforcement.

1) Pick defaults in .env (used if DB settings are absent):

```env
# Per-IP login rate limit
LOGIN_IP_WINDOW_MS=60000
LOGIN_IP_LIMIT=20

# Per-user lockout behavior
LOGIN_LOCK_WINDOW_MS=900000      # 15 minutes
LOGIN_LOCK_THRESHOLD=5           # 5 failed attempts in window
LOGIN_LOCK_DURATION_MS=900000    # 15 minutes

# Password history
PASSWORD_HISTORY_LIMIT=10

# Email verification
EMAIL_VERIFICATION_TTL_MIN=60
PASSWORD_RESET_TTL_MIN=30
```

1) Seed database settings (override env at runtime). You can set these via Admin UI → Settings → Security or with a quick script:

```ts
// scripts/upsert-security-settings.ts (run with ts-node)
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client'
const prisma = new PrismaClient()
async function main() {
  const entries = {
    requireEmailVerification: true,
    sessionMaxAgeMin: 60,
    loginIpWindowSec: 60,
    loginIpLimit: 20,
    loginLockWindowSec: 900,
    loginLockThreshold: 5,
    loginLockDurationMin: 15,
    passwordHistoryLimit: 10,
  }
  for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(entries)) {
    await prisma.setting.upsert({
      where: { category_key: { category: 'security', key } },
      update: { value },
      create: { category: 'security', key, value },
    })
  }
  await prisma.$disconnect()
}
main()
```

1) Verify behavior

- Login failures trigger per-IP throttling and per-user lockout after threshold within window; locked accounts return 423 until unlocked or expired
- Admin lock/unlock under `/admin/users/*` revokes sessions and sends reset email on unlock
- Password reset refuses recent passwords (last N), then records the new hash

- Account security APIs: `/auth/security` returns the snapshot used by the frontend, `/auth/security/sessions` lists refresh-token sessions, `POST /auth/security/password` (CSRF-protected) enforces the registration password policy before rotating hashes + revoking other sessions, `PUT /auth/security/recovery` persists updated recovery emails, SMS numbers, and break-glass contacts, and `PUT /auth/security/alerts` stores each user's alert preferences + default channels in `SecurityService`.

## Notifications quick start

- Notifications live in the `user.metadata.notifications` JSON blob. Defaults are generated by `NotificationService` so fresh accounts get baseline topics, digests, quiet hours, escalation targets, and device slots without additional seeds.
- Legacy Account Security alert preferences are auto-migrated into notification topics. When users save notifications the service also mirrors the relevant security topics back into `metadata.security.alerts` so the Security page stays accurate.
- API surface:
  - `GET /auth/notifications` (cookie auth) returns `{ settings }` with channels, topics, digests, quiet hours, escalations, and device registrations.
  - `PUT /auth/notifications` requires the CSRF header and accepts partial settings updates (channels, topics, digests, quiet hours, escalations, devices). The backend normalizes payloads, enforces channel enums, and persists to metadata.
- Remember to fetch `/auth/csrf` before issuing the PUT from a browser client, and include both the `x-csrf-token` header plus the existing session cookies when calling these endpoints locally.

## Audit log configuration

- The `audit` settings category now controls retention tiers, export approvals, alert routing, and reviewer rosters. Defaults are seeded via `DEFAULT_AUDIT_SETTINGS` and exposed through `GET /admin/settings`.
- Keys:
  - `audit.retention` &mdash; hot/cold tier durations and legal hold contacts.
  - `audit.exports` &mdash; export format, approval roles, watermarking, and expiration hours.
  - `audit.alerts` &mdash; channel toggles, severity recipients, webhook targets, and notify toggles.
  - `audit.reviewers` &mdash; primary/backup reviewer lists plus escalation window + standby channel.
- Update these via the Admin UI (Security & Access &rarr; Audit Logs) or `PUT /admin/settings` with `category: "audit"`.

## Versioning and Docs

- Admins can fetch backend and spec versions at `GET /admin/version`. Response contains:
  - `backend.version` and optional `backend.commit`
  - `openapi.pets`, `openapi.auth`, `openapi.admin`
- CI checks ensure OpenAPI `info.version` matches the backend `package.json` version. The workflow runs `npm run validate:openapi` under `backend/` on PRs and pushes to `main`.

Commit message:

docs: note tracked dev db snapshot

backend/README.md, after:

# Pet Shelter Backend

Run locally:

1. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and adjust as needed, or use the provided `.env` for local dev.
2. Install dependencies:

```bash
npm install
```

1. Generate Prisma client and run migrations (creates `dev.db`):

```bash
npx prisma generate
npx prisma migrate dev --name init
```

1. Seed the database:

```bash
npm run seed
```

## Shared dev database snapshot

The SQLite file at `prisma/dev.db` is intentionally versioned so every contributor works from the same seeded dataset. After running migrations or seeds that change reference data, re-run `npm run seed`, verify the resulting `dev.db`, and include it in your commits. Production deployments should point `DATABASE_URL` at their own Postgres or SQLite instance and must **not** reuse the tracked dev file.

## Default admin credentials

- Email: `admin@example.com`
- Password: `Admin123!@#`

Re-running the seed script now upgrades existing admin accounts that were created with older bcrypt hashes so they authenticate without server errors. To force-reset the admin password (for example, after changing the default), set `SEED_ADMIN_FORCE_RESET=true` when running `npm run seed`.

1. Run in dev mode:

```bash
npm run dev
```

Run tests (Jest + SuperTest):

```bash
NODE_ENV=test npm test
```

## OAuth provider setup (dev)

1. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and fill in:

- `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID` / `GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET`
- `GOOGLE_REDIRECT_URI` (default: `http://localhost:4000/auth/oauth/google/callback`)
- `GITHUB_CLIENT_ID` / `GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET`
- `GITHUB_REDIRECT_URI` (default: `http://localhost:4000/auth/oauth/github/callback`)
- `OAUTH_SUCCESS_REDIRECT` (default: `http://localhost:5173/`)
- `OAUTH_FAILURE_REDIRECT` (default: `http://localhost:5173/login?error=oauth_failed`)

1. Configure allowed callback URLs in the providers’ dashboards to match the redirect URIs above.

1. Ensure the frontend dev server runs on `http://localhost:5173` (Vite default) and the backend on `:4000`.

1. Enable providers via Admin Settings (`auth.google = true`, `auth.github = true`).

Then visit `/auth/oauth/google/start` or `/auth/oauth/github/start` from the browser.

## Email delivery (verification & reset)

For development, the server will log emails to the console if SMTP is not configured. To enable real email sending, set these variables in `.env`:

```env
SMTP_HOST=smtp.example.com
SMTP_PORT=587
SMTP_SECURE=false
SMTP_USER=apikey-or-username
SMTP_PASS=secret
EMAIL_FROM="Pet Shelter <no-reply@example.com>"
APP_ORIGIN=http://localhost:5173
```

APP_ORIGIN is used to build verification and reset links like `http://localhost:5173/verify-email?token=...` and `http://localhost:5173/reset-password?token=...`.

CI notes

- The repository contains a GitHub Actions workflow at `.github/workflows/ci.yml` that installs dependencies, runs Prisma generate, applies migrations against a local sqlite file, runs the seed script, and runs tests.
- For production Postgres, set `DATABASE_URL` to your Postgres DSN and update `prisma/schema.prisma` provider accordingly before running migrations.

## Security quick start

This backend supports account lockout, per-IP rate limits, email verification, and password history enforcement.

1) Pick defaults in .env (used if DB settings are absent):

```env
# Per-IP login rate limit
LOGIN_IP_WINDOW_MS=60000
LOGIN_IP_LIMIT=20

# Per-user lockout behavior
LOGIN_LOCK_WINDOW_MS=900000      # 15 minutes
LOGIN_LOCK_THRESHOLD=5           # 5 failed attempts in window
LOGIN_LOCK_DURATION_MS=900000    # 15 minutes

# Password history
PASSWORD_HISTORY_LIMIT=10

# Email verification
EMAIL_VERIFICATION_TTL_MIN=60
PASSWORD_RESET_TTL_MIN=30
```

1) Seed database settings (override env at runtime). You can set these via Admin UI → Settings → Security or with a quick script:

```ts
// scripts/upsert-security-settings.ts (run with ts-node)
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client'
const prisma = new PrismaClient()
async function main() {
  const entries = {
    requireEmailVerification: true,
    sessionMaxAgeMin: 60,
    loginIpWindowSec: 60,
    loginIpLimit: 20,
    loginLockWindowSec: 900,
    loginLockThreshold: 5,
    loginLockDurationMin: 15,
    passwordHistoryLimit: 10,
  }
  for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(entries)) {
    await prisma.setting.upsert({
      where: { category_key: { category: 'security', key } },
      update: { value },
      create: { category: 'security', key, value },
    })
  }
  await prisma.$disconnect()
}
main()
```

1) Verify behavior

- Login failures trigger per-IP throttling and per-user lockout after threshold within window; locked accounts return 423 until unlocked or expired
- Admin lock/unlock under `/admin/users/*` revokes sessions and sends reset email on unlock
- Password reset refuses recent passwords (last N), then records the new hash

- Account security APIs: `/auth/security` returns the snapshot used by the frontend, `/auth/security/sessions` lists refresh-token sessions, `POST /auth/security/password` (CSRF-protected) enforces the registration password policy before rotating hashes + revoking other sessions, `PUT /auth/security/recovery` persists updated recovery emails, SMS numbers, and break-glass contacts, and `PUT /auth/security/alerts` stores each user's alert preferences + default channels in `SecurityService`.

## Notifications quick start

- Notifications live in the `user.metadata.notifications` JSON blob. Defaults are generated by `NotificationService` so fresh accounts get baseline topics, digests, quiet hours, escalation targets, and device slots without additional seeds.
- Legacy Account Security alert preferences are auto-migrated into notification topics. When users save notifications the service also mirrors the relevant security topics back into `metadata.security.alerts` so the Security page stays accurate.
- API surface:
  - `GET /auth/notifications` (cookie auth) returns `{ settings }` with channels, topics, digests, quiet hours, escalations, and device registrations.
  - `PUT /auth/notifications` requires the CSRF header and accepts partial settings updates (channels, topics, digests, quiet hours, escalations, devices). The backend normalizes payloads, enforces channel enums, and persists to metadata.
- Remember to fetch `/auth/csrf` before issuing the PUT from a browser client, and include both the `x-csrf-token` header plus the existing session cookies when calling these endpoints locally.

## Audit log configuration

- The `audit` settings category now controls retention tiers, export approvals, alert routing, and reviewer rosters. Defaults are seeded via `DEFAULT_AUDIT_SETTINGS` and exposed through `GET /admin/settings`.
- Keys:
  - `audit.retention` &mdash; hot/cold tier durations and legal hold contacts.
  - `audit.exports` &mdash; export format, approval roles, watermarking, and expiration hours.
  - `audit.alerts` &mdash; channel toggles, severity recipients, webhook targets, and notify toggles.
  - `audit.reviewers` &mdash; primary/backup reviewer lists plus escalation window + standby channel.
- Update these via the Admin UI (Security & Access &rarr; Audit Logs) or `PUT /admin/settings` with `category: "audit"`.

## Versioning and Docs

- Admins can fetch backend and spec versions at `GET /admin/version`. Response contains:
  - `backend.version` and optional `backend.commit`
  - `openapi.pets`, `openapi.auth`, `openapi.admin`
- CI checks ensure OpenAPI `info.version` matches the backend `package.json` version. The workflow runs `npm run validate:openapi` under `backend/` on PRs and pushes to `main`.
